Every day, since November 1998,
the International Space Station
has been orbiting the Earth at a speed
of 28000 kilometres per hour
Having spent several months on-board
the International Space Station,
the time has come for
three of its crew members
to travel back to Earth
The return journey aboard a Soyuz capsule
takes three and a half hours
Before it can start,
there is a lot of preparation to do
Both in space and on the ground
The normal landing site
for the Soyuz is Kazakhstan
A group of ground based experts prepare
meticulously for this operation
They take into account
the current orbit of the station
and then select the most appropriate
landing site on the ground
The landing site is checked by
the search and rescue team,
to make sure that
the terrain is flat and free
from any obstructions that
could complicate the landing
The search and rescue team is able to
operate even in extreme weather conditions
When all the information
has been analysed,
the optimal return trajectory is calculated
One week before the Soyuz
undocks from the station,
the instructors and controllers located
in the Mission Control Centre near Moscow
conduct a remote training  session with
the crew and the on-board simulator
During this session, the crew
are reminded about the
most important actions
they will have to perform
during the re-entry
They carefully run through
the procedures for
each critical step,
including the scenarios
that could lead to
an emergency descent
They are also briefed
on the latest details
of their trip back,
such as landing conditions,
and the precise timelines for
the activation of vehicle systems
The on-board crew runs a test
of the Soyuz vehicle and begins
packing items that will travel
with them back to the ground
The Soyuz is then activated and
the crew starts preparing it for undocking
When instructed by the
ground controllers,
the crew say their goodbyes
to their colleagues staying behind,
and close the hatch that separates the
Soyuz orbital module from the Station
The hatch is carefully checked,
to make sure there are
no leaks that could cause
an unexpected cabin depressurization
The crew members put on their spacesuits
and enter the descent module that
they will occupy for the ultimate
rollercoaster ride back to Earth
Former astronaut Frank
De Winne is now head of
the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne
He remembers clearly the
emotions he felt as he was
about to leave the
International Space Station
Wow! Today I'm really going home
because of course the days before,
you are preparing for the descent,
you are reviewing all the procedures
you are going through all the radiograms
But it is only at the moment
that you are in your spacesuit
and that the hatches are closing
that you know that four hours
later you will be back on Earth
Both crew and vehicle are now
ready for the undocking sequence
The Russian segments of the station
have several docking ports
for hosting Soyuz vehicles
In this example,
the vehicle is going to undock
from the so called Service Module
In this case, the undocked Soyuz
reaches an orbit below the station
The orbital velocity of
the Soyuz also increases
Sometimes, however, the Soyuz is docked
to a port underneath the Station
In these situations,
approximately 40 minutes
before the undocking,  the Station
changes its orientation
The Soyuz then undocks and joins
a higher orbit and its velocity decreases
In both cases, after one revolution
of the earth, the orbits intersect
but because of their now
different velocities the Station
and the Soyuz  arrive at the
intersection point at different times
This prevents any possibility of
a collision  between the two vehicles
When the Flight Director
is ready a "GO"
is given to the crew
to initiate the undocking
The crew commander
issues the command
to open the Soyuz hooks
These are the only mechanical devices
holding the vehicles together
After approximately 3-4 minutes,
the hooks are
fully opened and the Soyuz is no longer
firmly attached to the Station
A set of pushers that were kept
mechanically compressed
while docked, gently
ease the Soyuz away from
the station at a relative
speed of 12 to 15 cm/s
Being so close to the Station,
the Soyuz propulsion system
is inhibited in order to avoid
contamination of the Station with residual
chemical dust produced
by the Soyuz thrusters
The crew gets visual confirmation of
the separation through the image
provided by the external TV camera,
and also from indications
displayed on their monitors
ESA astronaut Paolo Nespoli,
returned to earth aboard a Soyuz
spacecraft at the end of Expedition 27
I didn't actually feel the detach,
when we detached
from the Station,
physically I did not feel it
The physical departure from the Station
is done because of the push
of some springs that are inside
You don't want to start your
engines close to the Station,
because you are going to plume everything
So you are just kind of
drifting away and what you
are doing, what we were doing
was just looking at the instruments,
looking at the camera outside and
checking that the Soyuz would be inside
the departure corridor,
this is what we were doing
I did not really feel anything
The only thing is that we felt
we started this long
journey back to Earth
Three minutes later,
when the spacecraft
has moved about 20 metres,
the crew monitors
the 15 second burn that increases
the separation speed up to 2 km/h
This  leads the Soyuz to a safe position
relative to the Space Station
After the undocking,
the ground controllers upload
the data needed by
the on-board computer to
autonomously perform the descent
The crew is in constant
communication with the ground
They verify the validity of the data,
before allowing the computer to use it.
At this stage, the crew must
pay special attention to
prepare for the next
critical operation: the Deorbit Burn
As can be seen,
although the Soyuz is now
far away from the Station,
it is still orbiting
the Earth at an altitude
close to that of the ISS
The purpose of the Deorbit Burn is to
force the Soyuz to decrease its speed
As a result, the trajectory of the vehicle
changes and it re-enters the atmosphere
The atmosphere acts as a natural
brake and does most of the work
in slowing the Soyuz down
until a set of parachutes opens
and ensures a relatively soft landing
This braking is achieved by
using the main engine located
in the rear side of the spacecraft
to push against the
direction of travel
The required orientation
and duration of the
braking impulse must be
precisely calculated
and achieved because
it directly influences
the steepness of
the re-entry path
If we don't burn enough,
then we have still too much speed
and we will still be too high
in the atmosphere and we can
actually skip off the atmosphere
and then go further into space and that
of couse would not be a successful re-entry
On the other hand, if we burn too
much and we come in too steep
then we will have too much speed when
we are in the lower parts of the atmosphere
the heat that is normally
around 2000 degree Celsius
will be much higher and we
have the risk of burning up
So also therefore is very critical that
we do the correct deorbit burn
and that we really
fix this around 120 m/s
To achieve the correct burn,
the main engine fires
for exactly four minutes
and forty five seconds
The Soyuz now follows a
trajectory that will lead
it to intercept the dense
layers of the atmosphere,
leading to a safe re-entry and landing,
about 55 minutes later
As the vehicle travels along its
trajectory, about 30 minutes before
landing and at an altitude
of roughly 140 km,
it separates into three parts: the orbital
module, the descent module
and the instrument compartment
There is no chance of the individual
modules colliding with
each other, this is called
impact-less separation
Only the descent module hosting the crew
will make it back safely to Earth
The other two will disintegrate and
burn up in the atmosphere
The separation of the spacecraft into
three parts is happening through
several seconds, because
there are several
parts that get detached
one after the other
All this action is done with explosive
bolts or with explosive implements
Seen from the inside of the
spacecraft, it felt like
there was somebody outside the
spacecraft with a sledgehammer that
was hammering  here and there,
up and down so every few
milliseconds the spacecraft
was shaking with this
BANG! BANG! BANG! BANG!
It felt really interesting actually!
The descent module experiences
extreme high temperatures
during re-entry, so to protect it,
and the crew inside,
it is fitted with a
special protective
coating and has a heat
shield on its base
As the atmosphere becomes
more dense, the descent module
positions itself so that its heat
shield points forward
The capsule is about to enter
the Earthís atmosphere
This will be the most stressful
part of its journey home
By the time we were
supposed to re-enter
the atmosphere, I actually
looked out from our
window and I actually looked we were
tumbling and I was a little bit puzzled
because I thought we needed
to re-enter with a special angle,
so I started looking at procedures, we did
a few things and when I looked out again
I saw that we were already inside
this plasma, it was getting
really red and actually the
window was getting pretty dark
what was happening was that
the plasma stream was actually
burning the outside layer of
the window which has a protective cover
So it was  kind of interesting, at that
point I did not feel that much I mean
the gravity starts
grabbing you but it is very
gentle at the beginning
and you actually use it
to feel or go into the
seats and buckle up,
pull your straps so that you
really lay into the seat
It was an interesting feeling
The descent module follows a path
that is similar in shape
to that made by a surfer
riding a big wave
Like a surfer, the Soyuz is able to make
small adjustments to keep itself on track
So, how is the trajectory of a
free falling capsule controlled?
Even though it does not
have wings, the Soyuz
capsule is able to change the
way it flies through the air
The design of the Soyuz
enables it to do this
The capsuleís lift increases
when it rotates in one direction
and decreases if it rotates
in the opposite direction
In this way, the capsule is able to
keep to its planned trajectory
As a side effect,
this rotation also induces
a sideways displacement
of the module
This effect is very
useful because it gives
more flexibility for the selection
of the landing site
This sideways manoeuver
has already been taken
into account when selecting
the optimum trajectory
During the descent in the atmosphere,
the crew feels the effect of
the deceleration when
their weight exceeds
several times their own
weight on the ground
The maximum G-load (4G) is experienced
when the capsule reaches an
altitude of roughly 35 km while
it has already been travelling
for 6 to 7 minutes in the atmosphere
Gravity is a very,
very strong force
We do not understand
here on Earth how gravity
has such a hold on our body
and what is around us
You do feel it when you
come back from space
because now you have been in
a non-gravity environment
for a long time and then you see
all these forces grabbing you
You look at stuff and you feel
your hands are heavy,
you feel your watch weights a ton,
your books, the materials
around you, your head
is extremely heavy
It  is really a very strong feeling
In the unlikely event that the
automatic control system fails,
the crew is able to use a manual
hand controller as a backup
They train extensively to
prepare for this possibility
Another option is the ballistic descent
The spacecraft starts spinning and
flies a much steeper trajectory
without any additional
sideways displacement
The G-load in this case
will increase up to 9
When the capsule reaches an
altitude of 10.5 km, its speed
has already decreased
from 28000 to 800 km/h
In order to further decrease the speed,
the parachute cover
is jettisoned and a series
of parachutes are deployed
At the end of the atmospheric re-entry,
you really start hearing
the noise of the wind and the sound,
you are almost breaking the sound barrier
Then, in the opposite direction of course
you are coming back into
the normal area of flying
This is around 30000 feet that
the parachute has to open
This is actually a very critical
moment and is one of the
only things in the Soyuz where the
crew does not have a manual override
So this is only an automated system
So far, it has always worked and we
also have a backup parachute that can
help us in case that
the main will not open
But it is also a very
violent moment,
you can imagine this
2000 kilogram capsule
that is soaring at the speed of
sound through the atmosphere
and then all of the sudden
you have a parachute
that opens on the side and that
pulls on you, like a little swing,
It is almost like a yo-yo and you
see the capsule going all around
It is much worse than in
a roller coaster because
the motion is in all directions
and it is a little bit
scary for some of us,
for some others it can also be fun
because they are like "Wow this
is the best ride I've ever had!"
Then, a few minutes later, at a
height of 8.5 km, the drogue chute
finally deploys the 1000 square
metre canopy of the main parachute
This slows the capsule down
to a speed of  22 km/h
The capsule is suspended
under the parachute
with a specific angle
relative to the ground
This angle helps the capsule to
dissipate the heat accumulated
on its surface and structure
during the re-entry
But then everything calms down,
of course once that the main parachute
has deployed you really come to the
calm air after this whole violent
re-entry, the violent
opening of the parachute,
then you are hanging safely,
slowly descending
to the Earth underneath your parachute
and this is actually the
first time that you know:
Yes, I am safe, we are going to make it!
At an altitude of roughly 5.5 km,
the frontal heat shield and external
window glass are jettisoned
The capsule vents excess fuel
and oxygen from pressurised tanks,
to reduce any chance of an
explosion when it hits the ground
In order to position the spacecraft
adequately for the landing,
the main canopy switches
to symmetric suspension
This setup ensures that the
cosmonauts' seats are now
perfectly positioned to absorb
the landing impact shock
The retrorockets that were
hidden behind the heat shield
are prepared for firing
Inside the capsule, the crew
seats automatically raise
in order to prepare
shock absorbers
Usually, the Search and Rescue
Team equipped with aircraft
and helicopters starts
tracking the Soyuz capsule
even before the very first
parachute is deployed
The helicopters land next to the capsule
shortly after touch down
and the team help the crew to exit
Finally, 70 cm above the ground,
the six retro rockets fire
to further reduce the capsule
speed to approximately 5 km/h
The capsule hits the ground
but the crew seats continue
moving down and shock absorbers help
to make the landing softer for the crew
The soft landing is not really soft,
You prepare for it by putting your arms
against your body, not touching
any of the metallic parts, hold your books
against you, you are not talking
not to put the tongue in the middle of your
teeth and you are lying there trying
to be as inside your
seat as well as you can
and you are waiting for
this "soft landing" to happen,
which for me felt like a head-on collision
between a truck and a small car
and of course I was in the small car,
so when this happened it was like
BA-DA-BOOM!
everything shook, I was
kind of shaking in there,
everything was, and then...
silence everything was stopped
So I looked a little bit around, I looked
at my crew members and then I said:
Hey guys,
Welcome back to Earth!
Once landed,
one of the first actions
of the crew commander
is to release
one of the two ropes that connect
the capsule to the parachute
This is important, as  in
windy conditions, it prevents
the capsule from being dragged away on
the ground by the inflated parachute
You know that you are on the ground,
you hear the voices of the rescue troops
that are next to you and you know that 5
minutes later they will open up the hatch
and you can breathe fresh air
The crew is now safely back on Earth
They will soon be reunited with
their families and begin
the rehabilitation process,
after their extraordinary journey